Update the chapter on how to import CSV files (#154)
neo4j/docs-getting-started: modules/ROOT/pages/data-import/csv-import.adoc

It is a standard file format that humans and systems are already familiar with using and handling.

== Ways to import CSV files

There are a few different approaches to get CSV data into Neo4j, each with varying criteria and functionality.
The option you choose depends on the dataset size, as well as your degree of comfort with various tools.

Let us see some of the ways Neo4j can read and import CSV files.

1. `LOAD CSV` Cypher command: this command is a great starting point and handles small- to medium-sized data sets (up to 10 million records).
_Works with any setup, including AuraDB._
2. The `neo4j-admin import` tool: command-line tool useful for straightforward loading of large data sets.
_Works with Neo4j Desktop, Neo4j EE Docker image and local installations._
3. Neo4j ETL tool: Neo4j Labs project.
For more details and documentation, visit link:https://neo4j.com/labs/etl-tool/[Neo4j ETL Tool page].
4. Kettle import tool: maps and executes steps for the data process flow and works well for very large datasets, especially if you are already familiar with using this tool. _Works with any setup, including AuraDB._

> We provide a brief oview of the `LOAD CSV` Cypher command and `neo4j-admin import` command, how they operate, and how to get started with a general use case.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the below section, you will find a brief overview of the `LOAD CSV` Cypher command and `neo4j-admin import` command, how they operate, and how to get started with a general use case.
```

> Data quality can also be an issue for any type of data import to any system, so a few of these potential difficulties and ways to overcome them will be covered in this section.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Data quality can be an issue for any type of data import to any system. 
A few of these potential difficulties and ways to overcome them will, therefore, be covered in this section.
```

[[import-load-csv]]
== *LOAD CSV* command with Cypher

The `LOAD CSV` clause is a part of the Cypher query language.

> Our link:https://neo4j.com/docs/cypher-manual/4.4/[Cypher manual^] contains a page devoted to its usage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information about the `LOAD CSV` clause, see the link:https://neo4j.com/docs/cypher-manual/4.4/clauses/load-csv/[Cypher Manual -> LOAD CSV^].
```

It is widely applicable.

> `LOAD CSV` is not just the basic data ingestion mechanism.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`LOAD CSV` is not simply a basic data ingestion mechanism.
```

It performs multiple actions in a single operation:

> * supports loading/ingesting CSV data from a URI

Reviewer: I think all of these bullet-points should be closed with a full stop.

> * directly maps input data into complex graph/domain structure

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* directly maps input data into complex graph/domain structures
```

* handles data conversion
* supports complex computations

> * creates or merges entities, relationships, and structure

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* creates or merges entities, relationships, and structures
```

--
[NOTE]

> For better control, you can run `LOAD CSV` command with `cypher-shell` instead of in Neo4j Browser.

Reviewer: I don't think Cypher Shell (both capitalised according to the ops manual) should be within backticks. 
```suggestion
For better control, you can run the `LOAD CSV` command with Cypher Shell instead of in Neo4j Browser.
```

> More information is in the Operations Manual on link:https://neo4j.com/docs/operations-manual/4.4/tools/cypher-shell/[Cypher shell^].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information about Cypher Shell, see link:https://neo4j.com/docs/operations-manual/4.4/tools/cypher-shell/[Operations Manual -> Cypher shell^].
```

--

=== Reading CSV files

`LOAD CSV` can handle local and remote files, and there is some syntax associated with each.

> This can be an easy thing to miss and end up with an access error, so the rules are clarified here.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This can be an easy thing to miss and result in an access error, so the rules are clarified here.
```

*Local files* may be loaded using a `file:///` prefix before the file name.  +
Since link:https://neo4j.com/cloud/platform/aura-graph-database/[AuraDB] is cloud based, this local file approach does not work with AuraDB.

> Due to security reasons, local files, by default, can only be read from the Neo4j import directory, which is different based on your operating system.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Due to security reasons, local files, by default, can only be read from the Neo4j import directory, which differs depending on your operating system.
```

> File locations for each OS are listed in our link:https://neo4j.com/docs/operations-manual/4.4/configuration/file-locations[Neo4j Operations Manual^].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
File locations for each OS are listed in the link:https://neo4j.com/docs/operations-manual/4.4/configuration/file-locations[Operations Manual -> File locations^].
```

It is recommended to put files in Neo4j's _import_ directory, as it keeps the environment secure.

> However, if you need to access files in other locations, you can find out which setting to alter in our link:https://neo4j.com/docs/cypher-manual/4.4/clauses/load-csv/#query-load-csv-introduction[Cypher manual^].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However, if you need to access files in other locations, you can find out which setting to alter in the link:https://neo4j.com/docs/cypher-manual/4.4/clauses/load-csv/#query-load-csv-introduction[Cypher Manual -> LOAD CSV introduction^].
```

> Default import folder paths are shown in link:https://neo4j.com/developer/kb/import-csv-locations/[the Knowledge Base article^].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Default import folder paths are shown in this link:https://neo4j.com/developer/kb/import-csv-locations/[Knowledge Base article^].
```

For best performance, always `MATCH` and `MERGE` on a single label with the indexed primary-key property.
--

> Suppose you use the preceding *companies.csv* file, and now you have a file that contains people and which companies they work for:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Suppose you use the preceding *companies.csv* file, and now you have a file that contains people and the companies they work for:
```

When the amount of data being loaded is too much to fit into memory, there are a couple of different approaches you can use to combat running out of memory during the data load.

1. Batch the import into sections with `PERIODIC COMMIT`.
+
This clause can be added before the `LOAD CSV` clause to tell Cypher to only process so many rows of the file before clearing memory and transaction state.

> For more information, see the link:https://neo4j.com/docs/cypher-manual/4.4/query-tuning/using/#query-using-periodic-commit-hint/[manual page^] on `PERIODIC COMMIT`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information, see the link:https://neo4j.com/docs/cypher-manual/4.4/query-tuning/using/#query-using-periodic-commit-hint/[Cypher Manual -> PERIODIC COMMIT query hints^].
```

...
----

--
[IMPORTANT]

`PERIODIC COMMIT` was deprecated in *Neo4j v4.4*.
It is recommended to use `CALL { … } IN TRANSACTIONS` instead.
For more information, see link:https://neo4j.com/docs/cypher-manual/4.4/clauses/call-subquery/#subquery-call-in-transactions/[Cypher Manual on subqueries]. 
--

2. Avoid the `Eager` operator.
+
Some statements pull in more rows than it is necessary, adding extra processing up front.
To avoid this, you can run link:https://neo4j.com/docs/cypher-manual/4.4/query-tuning/#how-do-i-profile-a-query[`PROFILE`] on your queries to see if they use `Eager` loading and either modify queries or run multiple passes on the same file, so it does not do this.

> For more information about the `Eager` operator, see the link:https://neo4j.com/docs/cypher-manual/4.4/execution-plans/operators/#query-plan-eager[Cypher manual].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information about the `Eager` operator, see the link:https://neo4j.com/docs/cypher-manual/4.4/execution-plans/operators/#query-plan-eager[Cypher Manual -> Eager operator].
```

// To learn how to avoid loading EAGER, see https://markhneedham.com/blog/2014/10/23/neo4j-cypher-avoiding-the-eager/[Mark's blog post^].

3. Adjust configuration for the database on heap and memory to avoid page-faults.
+
To help handle larger volumes of transactions, you can increase some configuration settings for the database and restart the instance for them to take effect.

> Usually, you can create or update 1M records in a single transaction per 2 GB of heap.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Usually, you can create or update 1 million records in a single transaction per 2 GB of heap.
```

In `neo4j.conf`:
+
* `dbms.memory.heap.initial_size` and `dbms.memory.heap.max_size`: set to at least 4G.
* `dbms.memory.pagecache.size`: ideally, value large enough to keep the whole database in memory.

==== *LOAD CSV* resources
* xref:appendix/tutorials/guide-import-desktop-csv.adoc[How-To: Import CSV data with Neo4j Desktop]
* link:https://neo4j.com/docs/cypher-manual/4.4/clauses/load-csv/[Cypher Manual: LOAD CSV^]
* xref:appendix/tutorials/guide-import-relational-and-etl.adoc[Tutorial: Import relational data into Neo4j]
* link:https://graphacademy.neo4j.com/courses/importing-data[GraphAcademy: Importing CSV Data into Neo4j]

[[batch-importer]]
== The `neo4j-admin import` command for large datasets

`LOAD CSV` is great for importing small- or medium-sized data (up to 10M records).
For datasets larger than this, you can use the `neo4j-admin import` command.
This allows you to import CSV data to an empty database by specifying node files and relationship files.

> Suppose you want to import order data via `neo4j-admin import` into a Neo4j instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Suppose you want to import the below order data via `neo4j-admin import` into a Neo4j instance.
```

> Here are the CSV files.

Reviewer: Im not quite sure what "Here" is pointing to here?

* The `--id-type=STRING` indicates that all `:ID` columns contain alphanumeric values (there is an optimization for numeric-only IDs).
* The `customers.csv` is imported directly as nodes with the `:Customer` label and the properties are taken directly from the file.
* `Product` nodes follow the same pattern where the node labels are taken from the `:LABEL` column.
* The `Order` nodes are taken from three files - one header and two content files.
* Line item relationships typed `:CONTAINS` are created from `order_details.csv`, relating orders with the contained products via their IDs.
* Orders are connected to customers by using the order CSV files again, but this time with a different header, which :IGNORE's the non-relevant columns.

The column names are used for property-names of your nodes and relationships.

> There is specific markup on specific columns, which will be explained.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is specific markup on specific columns:
```

* `name:ID` - global id column used to look up the node later reconnecting.
** if the property name is left off, it will be not stored (temporary), which is what the `--id-type` refers to.
** if you have repeated IDs across entities, you have to provide the entity (id-group) in parentheses like `:ID(Order)`.
** if your IDs are globally unique, you can leave that off.
* `:LABEL` - label column for nodes. Multiple labels can be separated by delimiter.
* `:START_ID`, `:END_ID` - relationship file columns referring to the node IDs. For id-groups, use `:END_ID(Order)`.
* `:TYPE` - column to specify relationship-type.
* All other columns are treated as properties but skipped if empty or annotated with `:IGNORE`.
* Type conversion is possible by suffixing the name with indicators like `:INT`, `:BOOLEAN`, etc.

> For more details on this header format and the tool, see the section in the link:https://neo4j.com/docs/operations-manual/4.4/tools/neo4j-admin/neo4j-admin-import/[Neo4j Operations Manual^] and the accompanying link:https://neo4j.com/docs/operations-manual/4.4/tutorial/neo4j-admin-import/[tutorial^].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more details on this header format and the tool, see the link:https://neo4j.com/docs/operations-manual/4.4/tools/neo4j-admin/neo4j-admin-import/[Operations Manual -> Neo4j admin import^] and the accompanying link:https://neo4j.com/docs/operations-manual/4.4/tutorial/neo4j-admin-import/[tutorial^].
```

[[data-load-quality]]
== CSV data quality

Real-world data is messy.
Any time you work with data, you will see some values that need cleaned up or transformed before you move it to another system.
Small syntax errors, format descriptions, consistency, correct quoting, and even differing assumptions on data requirements or standards can easily cause hours of cleanup down the road.

We will highlight some of the data quality issues easily missed when loading data from other systems into Neo4j and try to help avoid problems with data import and cleanup.

=== Common pitfalls

* *Headers are inconsistent with data (missing, too many columns, different delimiter in header)*.
+
Verify headers match the data in the file.
Adjusting formatting, delimiters, columns, etc. at this stage will save a great deal of time later.

* *Extra or missing quotes throughout file*.
+
Standalone double or single quotes in the middle of non-quoted text or non-escaped quotes in quoted text can cause issues reading the file for loading.
It is best to either escape or remove stray quotes.

> Documentation for proper escaping is in the link:https://neo4j.com/docs/cypher-manual/4.4/styleguide/#cypher-styleguide-meta-characters[Cypher style guide] and a link:https://neo4j.com/developer/kb/parsing-of-quotes-for-load-csv-and-or-import/[Knowledge Base article^].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Documentation for proper escaping can be found in the link:https://neo4j.com/docs/cypher-manual/4.4/styleguide/#cypher-styleguide-meta-characters[Cypher Manual -> style guide], and in this link:https://neo4j.com/developer/kb/parsing-of-quotes-for-load-csv-and-or-import/[Knowledge Base article^].
```

* *Special or Newline characters in file*.
+
When dealing with any special characters in a file, ensure they are quoted or remove them.
For newline characters in quoted or unquoted fields, either add quotes for these or remove them.

* *Inconsistent line breaks*.
+
One thing that computers do not handle well is inconsistent data.
Ensure line breaks are consistent throughout.
We recommend choosing the Unix style for compatibility with Linux systems (common format for import tools).

> * *Binary zeros, BOM byte order mark (2 UTF-8 bytes) at beginning of file, or other non-text characters*.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *Binary zeros, BOM byte order mark (2 UTF-8 bytes) at beginning of the file, or other non-text characters*.
```

Basic tools, such as hexdump, vi, emacs, UltraEdit, and Notepad++ work well for handling shortcut-based commands for editing and manipulating files.
However, there are also other more efficient or user-friendly options available that assist in data cleanup and formatting.

* xref:/appendix/tutorials/guide-import-desktop-csv.adoc#inspect-files[Cypher] - what Cypher sees is what will be imported, so you can use that to your advantage.

> Using `LOAD CSV` without creating graph structure just outputs samples, counts, or distributions to make it possible to detect incorrect header column counts, delimiters, quotes, escapes, or header name spellings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using `LOAD CSV` without creating a graph structure only outputs samples, counts, or distributions to make it possible to detect incorrect header column counts, delimiters, quotes, escapes, or header name spellings.
```
